docs: cleaning up after failed membership change (#13186)
scylladb/scylladb: docs/operating-scylla/procedures/cluster-management/handling-membership-change-failures.rst

Handling cluster membership change failures
*******************************************

> A failure may happen in the middle of a cluster membership change (that is: bootstrap, decommission, removenode or replace), such as loss of power. If that happens, you should ensure that the cluster is brought back to a consistent state as soon as possible. Further membership changes might be impossible until you do so.

Reviewer: First of all, let me say how much I appreciate this work. However, given all the comments we receive on this pull request, I think, we need to explain why they will be impossible: 
the failed node may remain a member of Raft quorum and prevent the cluster from committing changes to its Raft state. 
I would also mention the kind of behaviour to expect in this case: nodetool operation timeout. It is not the best behaviour and perhaps we should provide a user-friendly error message to avoid long and futile waits.

Reviewer: I am also wondering what specific case we have in mind here, since in most cases the node joins as a non-voter, and only then becomes a voter.

Reviewer: I think it is worth explaining that in reality a single failed node hardly makes a difference. But if operation failures accumulate, they may render the cluster useless.

Author: Non-voters don't prevent further topology changes.

I'm aware of at least one case where a failed decommission prevents further topology changes, and it is not related to Raft. If a node crashes during decommission after `set_bootstrap_state` in `leave_ring()` (I placed `abort` there to reproduce the problem):
```cpp
future<> storage_service::leave_ring() {
    co_await _sys_ks.local().set_bootstrap_state(db::system_keyspace::bootstrap_state::NEEDS_BOOTSTRAP);
    std::abort();
    co_await mutate_token_metadata([this] (mutable_token_metadata_ptr tmptr) {
        auto endpoint = get_broadcast_address();
        tmptr->remove_endpoint(endpoint);
        return update_pending_ranges(std::move(tmptr), format("leave_ring {}", endpoint));
    });

    auto expire_time = _gossiper.compute_expire_time().time_since_epoch().count();
    co_await _gossiper.add_local_application_state(gms::application_state::STATUS,
            versioned_value::left(co_await _sys_ks.local().get_local_tokens(), expire_time));
    auto delay = std::max(get_ring_delay(), gms::gossiper::INTERVAL);
    slogger.info("Announcing that I have left the ring for {}ms", delay.count());
    co_await sleep_abortable(delay, _abort_source);
}
```

The node will then refuse to restart, and further nodes will refuse to bootstrap because they need to contact all nodes to bootstrap e.g. to do the CDC generation write which uses CL=ALL, including the node which failed to decommission (it's still a NORMAL member in this case):
```
init - Startup failed: exceptions::unavailable_exception (Cannot achieve consistency level for cl ALL. Requires 3, alive 2)
```

There easily might be more such places in decommission where a failure may render a node unusable and the cluster in a weird state, I'm pretty sure we're not aware of them all.

I'm not sure we should write out detailed explanations of possible ways of how topology requests might be impossible after a failure because:
1. that's not the goal of the document, the goal is to explain how to handle failures / bring the cluster to a good state
2. we don't/cannot know all the possible ways. I wouldn't "expect" anything "nice" or predictable to happen until the failure is handled.

------------------------------
Handling a failed decommission
------------------------------

There are two cases.

Most likely the failure happened during the data repair/streaming phase - before the node tried to leave the token ring. Look for a log message containing "leaving token ring" in the logs of the node that you tried to decommission. For example:

.. code-block:: console

    INFO  2023-03-14 13:08:38,323 [shard 0] storage_service - decommission[5b2e752e-964d-4f36-871f-254491f4e8cc]: leaving token ring

If the message is **not** present, the failure happened before the node tried to leave the token ring. In that case you can simply restart the node and attempt to decommission it again.

If the message is present, the node attempted to leave the token ring, but it might have left the cluster only partially before the failure. **Do not try to restart the node**. Instead, you must remove any leftovers using the :doc:`removenode operation </operating-scylla/nodetool-commands/removenode/>`. See :ref:`cleaning up after a failed membership change <cleaning-up-after-change>`.

> If you don't have access to the node's logs anymore, assume the second case (the node might have attempted to leave the token ring), **do not try to restart the node**, instead follow the :ref:`cleaning up after a failed membership change <cleaning-up-after-change>` section.

Reviewer: Please explain what happens if you try to restart the node.

----------------------------
Handling a failed removenode
----------------------------

Simply retry the removenode operation.

If you somehow lost the host ID of the node that you tried to remove, follow the instructions in :ref:`cleaning up after a failed membership change <cleaning-up-after-change>`.

--------------------------
Handling a failed replace
--------------------------

Replace is a special case of bootstrap, but the bootstrapping node tries to take the place of another dead node. You can retry a failed replace operation by restarting the replacing node.

> If the node refuses to perform replace on subsequent attempts, follow the instructions in  :ref:`cleaning up after a failed membership change <cleaning-up-after-change>` section to remove the remains of the replacing node. You can then clear the node's data directories and attempt to replace again, or you can remove the dead node which you initially tried to replace using :doc:`removenode </operating-scylla/nodetool-commands/removenode/>`, then perform a regular bootstrap.

Reviewer: I think "refuses" is hardly possible. In fact, if you know any reason for a restart to fail, other than a resource problem (disk, memory, OS resources such as file descriptors), it is best to mention such reason explicitly. Otherwise I think it is better to say "If the failure persists", or something along these lines.

.. _cleaning-up-after-change:

--------------------------------------------
Cleaning up after a failed membership change
--------------------------------------------

> After a failed membership change, the cluster may contain remains of a node that tried to leave or join - other nodes may consider the node a member, possibly in a transitioning state. It is important to remove any such "ghost" members. Their presence may reduce the cluster's availability, performance, or prevent further membership changes. In some cases they might be removed automatically by Scylla, but this is not guaranteed yet.

Reviewer: It is best to make this statement as explicit as possible. We join as a non-voter, therefore a failed join is hardly an issue. By referring to cluster performance, I think it is best to clarify that the failure detector will try contacting that node to see if it has become alive  - Raft direct pinger has no convict threshold. And Raft leader will continuously try reaching that node and sending changes to it. This will consume cluster resources.

Author: "some cases" might in particular include `consistent_cluster_management: False` :)

Handling cluster membership change failures
*******************************************

> A failure may happen in the middle of a cluster membership change (that is: bootstrap, decommission, removenode or replace), such as loss of power. If that happens, you should ensure that the cluster is brought back to a consistent state as soon as possible. Further membership changes might be impossible until you do so.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A failure may happen in the middle of a cluster membership change (that is bootstrap, decommission, removenode, or replace), such as loss of power. If that happens, you should ensure that the cluster is brought back to a consistent state as soon as possible. Further membership changes might be impossible until you do so.
```

> For example, a node that crashed in the middle of decommission might leave the cluster in a state where it considers the node to still be a member, but the node itself will refuse to restart and communicate with the cluster. This particular case is very unlikely - it requires a specific timed crash to happen, after the data streaming phase of decommission finishes but before the node commits that it left - but if it happens, you won't be able to bootstrap further nodes (they will try to contact the partially-decommissioned node and fail) until you remove the remains of this node.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For example, a node that crashed in the middle of decommission might leave the cluster in a state where it considers the node to still be a member, but the node itself will refuse to restart and communicate with the cluster. This particular case is very unlikely as it requires a specifically timed crash to happen after the data streaming phase of decommission finishes but before the node commits that it left. But if it happens, you won't be able to bootstrap other nodes (they will try to contact the partially-decommissioned node and fail) until you remove the remains of the node that crashed.
```

Reviewer 2: Not critical, but makes the sentence clearer and easier to read.

If a failure happens when trying to bootstrap a new node to the cluster, you can try bootstrapping the node again by restarting it.

If the failure persists or you decided that you don't want to bootstrap the node anymore, follow the instructions in the :ref:`cleaning up after a failed membership change <cleaning-up-after-change>` section to remove the remains of the bootstrapping node. You can then clear the node's data directories and attempt to bootstrap it again.

------------------------------
Handling a Failed Decommission
------------------------------

There are two cases.

Most likely the failure happened during the data repair/streaming phase - before the node tried to leave the token ring. Look for a log message containing "leaving token ring" in the logs of the node that you tried to decommission. For example:

.. code-block:: console

    INFO  2023-03-14 13:08:38,323 [shard 0] storage_service - decommission[5b2e752e-964d-4f36-871f-254491f4e8cc]: leaving token ring

If the message is **not** present, the failure happened before the node tried to leave the token ring. In that case you can simply restart the node and attempt to decommission it again.

> If the message is present, the node attempted to leave the token ring, but it might have left the cluster only partially before the failure. **Do not try to restart the node**. Instead, you must make sure that the node is dead and remove any leftovers using the :doc:`removenode operation </operating-scylla/nodetool-commands/removenode/>`. See :ref:`cleaning up after a failed membership change <cleaning-up-after-change>`. Trying to restart the node after such failure results in unpredictable behavior - it may restart normally, it may refuse to restart, or it may even try to rebootstrap.

Reviewer 3: This looks a bit scary and gives an impression that the system is fragile. If we tell users to not attempt the restart after certain thing is logged, the node could do this automatically and record a flag locally and refuse to boot if the flag is set, and tell the user what to do.

Author: > This looks a bit scary and gives an impression that the system is fragile.

Because it is.

Fixing the fragility > documenting the fragility > doing nothing.

I support fixing the fragility eventually, but instead of constantly patching the legacy gossiper-based topology changes code which will always be fragile in some ways, we should focus on delivering consistent raft-based topology changes with fencing and all that. The legacy can stay documented and eventually we'll disable it.

> If we tell users to not attempt the restart after certain thing is logged, the node could do this automatically and record a flag locally and refuse to boot if the flag is set, and tell the user what to do.

In this particular scenario, the node may try to rebootstrap after leaving token ring precisely _because_ it's setting a flag:
```cpp
future<> storage_service::leave_ring() {
    co_await _sys_ks.local().set_bootstrap_state(db::system_keyspace::bootstrap_state::NEEDS_BOOTSTRAP);
```
we have this code since 2015. Is there really a point in fixing it now?

Reviewer 3: > In this particular scenario, the node may try to rebootstrap after leaving token ring precisely because it's setting a flag:

I meant a flag which is set before the noreturn point. If that fails, we haven't reached the noreturn point yet, so can retry. If it succeeds, we're safe against restarts.

This is not a blocker for documenting it.

If you don't have access to the node's logs anymore, assume the second case (the node might have attempted to leave the token ring), **do not try to restart the node**, instead follow the :ref:`cleaning up after a failed membership change <cleaning-up-after-change>` section.

----------------------------
Handling a failed removenode
----------------------------

Simply retry the removenode operation.

If you somehow lost the host ID of the node that you tried to remove, follow the instructions in :ref:`cleaning up after a failed membership change <cleaning-up-after-change>`.

--------------------------
Handling a failed replace
--------------------------

Replace is a special case of bootstrap, but the bootstrapping node tries to take the place of another dead node. You can retry a failed replace operation by restarting the replacing node.

> If the failure persists or you decided that you don't want to perform the replace anymore, follow the instructions in  :ref:`cleaning up after a failed membership change <cleaning-up-after-change>` section to remove the remains of the replacing node. You can then clear the node's data directories and attempt to replace again, or you can remove the dead node which you initially tried to replace using :doc:`removenode </operating-scylla/nodetool-commands/removenode/>`, then perform a regular bootstrap.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If the failure persists or you decided that you don't want to perform the replace anymore, follow the instructions in  :ref:`cleaning up after a failed membership change <cleaning-up-after-change>` section to remove the remains of the replacing node. You can then clear the node's data directories and attempt to replace again. Alternatively, you can remove the dead node you initially tried to replace using :doc:`removenode </operating-scylla/nodetool-commands/removenode/>`, and then perform a regular bootstrap.
```

Reviewer 2: To make the sentence easier to read.

* After a failed decommission, you need to determine the host ID of the node that tried to decommission. You can search the node's logs as in the failed bootstrap case (see above), or you can use the generic method below.
* After a failed removenode, you need to determine the host ID of the node that you tried to remove. You should already have it, since executing a removenode requires the host ID in the first place. But if you lost it somehow, read the generic method below.
* After a failed replace, you need to determine the host ID of the replacing node. Search the node's logs as in the failed bootstrap case (see above), or you can use the generic method below. You may also want to determine the host ID of the replaced node - either to attempt replacing it again after removing the remains of the previous replacing node, or to remove it using :doc:`nodetool removenode </operating-scylla/nodetool-commands/removenode/>`. You should already have the host ID of the replaced node if you used the ``replace_node_first_boot`` option to perform the replace.

> If you cannot determine the ghost members' host ID using the suggestions above, use the method described below. The approach differs depending on whether you enabled Raft in your cluster.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you cannot determine the ghost members' host ID using the suggestions above, use the method described below. The approach differs depending on whether Raft is enabled in your cluster.
```

Reviewer 2: Raft will be enabled by default, so, in the long run, it's better to avoid suggesting that it's the user who enables it.

        #. A host ID belongs to a ghost member if:

            * It appears in the ``system.raft_state`` query but not in the ``system.cluster_status`` query,
            * Or it appears in the ``system.cluster_status`` query but does not correspond to any remaining node in your cluster.

            In our example, the ghost member's host ID was ``aff11c6d-fbe7-4395-b7ca-3912d7dba2c6`` because it appeared in the ``system.raft_state`` query but not in the ``system.cluster_status`` query.

            If you're unsure whether a given row in the ``system.cluster_status`` query corresponds to a node in your cluster, you can connect to each node in the cluster and execute ``select host_id from system.local`` (or search the node's logs) to obtain that node's host ID, collecting the host IDs of all nodes in your cluster. Then check if each host ID from the ``system.cluster_status`` query appears in your collected set; if not, it's a ghost member.

>             A good rule of thumb is to look at the members marked as down (``up = False`` in ``system.cluster_status``) - ghost members are eventually marked as down by remaining members of the cluster. But remember that a real member might also be marked as down if it was shutdown or partitioned away from the rest of the cluster. If in doubt, connect to each node and collect their host IDs as described in the previous paragraph.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
            A good rule of thumb is to look at the members marked as down (``up = False`` in ``system.cluster_status``) - ghost members are eventually marked as down by the remaining members of the cluster. But remember that a real member might also be marked as down if it was shutdown or partitioned away from the rest of the cluster. If in doubt, connect to each node and collect their host IDs, as described in the previous paragraph.
```

Reviewer 2: Might seem trivial, but "remaining" looks like a verb here, which affects readability.

                 127.0.0.2 | 225a80d0-633d-45d2-afeb-a5fa422c9bd5 |  True

            The output of this query is similar to the output of ``nodetool status``.

            We included the ``up`` column to see which nodes are down.

            In this example, one of the 3 nodes tried to decommission but crashed while it was leaving the token ring. The node is in a partially left state and will refuse to restart, but other nodes still consider it as a normal member. We'll have to use ``removenode`` to clean up after it.

        #. A host ID belongs to a ghost member if it appears in the ``system.cluster_status`` query but does not correspond to any remaining node in your cluster.

            If you're unsure whether a given row in the ``system.cluster_status`` query corresponds to a node in your cluster, you can connect to each node in the cluster and execute ``select host_id from system.local`` (or search the node's logs) to obtain that node's host ID, collecting the host IDs of all nodes in your cluster. Then check if each host ID from the ``system.cluster_status`` query appears in your collected set; if not, it's a ghost member.

>             A good rule of thumb is to look at the members marked as down (``up = False`` in ``system.cluster_status``) - ghost members are eventually marked as down by remaining members of the cluster. But remember that a real member might also be marked as down if it was shutdown or partitioned away from the rest of the cluster. If in doubt, connect to each node and collect their host IDs as described in the previous paragraph.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
            A good rule of thumb is to look at the members marked as down (``up = False`` in ``system.cluster_status``) - ghost members are eventually marked as down by the remaining members of the cluster. But remember that a real member might also be marked as down if it was shutdown or partitioned away from the rest of the cluster. If in doubt, connect to each node and collect their host IDs, as described in the previous paragraph.
```

Reviewer 2: As above.

            In our example, the ghost member's host ID is ``42405b3b-487e-4759-8590-ddb9bdcebdc5`` because it is the only member marked as down and we can verify that the other two rows appearing in ``system.cluster_status`` belong to the remaining 2 nodes in the cluster.

> In some cases even after a failed topology change there may be no ghost members left - for example, if a bootstrapping node crashed very early in the procedure, or if a decommissioning node crashed after it committed the membership change but before it finalized its own shutdown steps.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In some cases, even after a failed topology change, there may be no ghost members left - for example, if a bootstrapping node crashed very early in the procedure or a decommissioning node crashed after it committed the membership change but before it finalized its own shutdown steps.
```

Reviewer 2: Readability.
